A function is a block of code designed to perform a specific task.

Functions in C++ follow this basic syntax:

returnType functionName(parameters) {
    // function body
}

Return Type: Specifies the data type of the value returned by the function. Use void if no value is returned.

Function Name: Describes what the function does.

Parameters: Input values for the function (optional).




Formal parameters: Defined in the function signature.
Actual parameters: Values passed during the function call.
Default parameters: Parameters with default values if none are passed.

To execute a function, you call it by its name followed by parentheses.
If the function takes arguments, pass them inside the parentheses.


A function definition includes the full function with the body.
You must define the function after declaring it if it’s not inline.

Function declaration tells the compiler about the function’s name, return type, and parameters. It’s also called a function prototype.
The function body is defined elsewhere.


Pass by value means the function receives a copy of the argument. Changes made inside the function do not affect the original variable.


Pass by reference passes the actual variable, so changes in this function affect the original variable.



Variables declared inside a function have local scope (accessible only within the function).
Variables declared outside all functions have global scope (accessible from any function).

Function overloading allows multiple functions with the same name but different parameter types or numbers.


A lambda function is an anonymous function that can be defined inline using the [] syntax.
They’re useful for short, simple functions.


Function Declaration & Definition: Tell the compiler about a function and define what it does.
Calling Functions: Execute the function by passing arguments if required.
Pass by Value/Reference: Controls whether changes affect the original value or a copy.
Function Overloading: Allows multiple functions with the same name but different parameter lists.
Lambda Functions: Short, inline functions used for simple tasks.